Introduction to Data Science
=================

## Vanderbilt University

## Human and Organizational Development

## Course Number HOD 3200

## Spring 2021

William R. Doyle

Office Hours: Wednesdays and Thursdays, 2:30-5
(<https://outlook.office365.com/owa/calendar/WillDoyle@Vanderbilt365.onmicrosoft.com/bookings/>) or by appointment

Email: <w.doyle@vanderbilt.edu>

Twitter: [@wdoyle42](https://twitter.com/wdoyle42)

# Introduction

We have entered a time in which vast amounts of data are more widely
available than ever before. At the same time, a new set of tools has
been developed to analyze this data and provide decision makers with
information to help them accomplish their goals. Those who engage with
data and interpret it for organizational leaders have taken to calling
themselves data scientists, and their craft data science. Other terms
that have come into vogue are “Big Data,” “Predictive Analytics” and
“Data Mining.” These can seem to be mysterious domains. The point of
this class is to demystify much of this endeavor for individuals who
will be organizational leaders.

The class is structured around developing students’ skills in three
areas: getting data, analyzing data to make predictions, and presenting
the results of analysis. For each area, the subtopics are as follows:

## Getting Data Topics

-   Tools of the Trade: R and Rstudio, git and Github
-   Working with pre-processed data and flat files
-   Getting data from the web: webscraping, using forms, using
    Application Programming Interfaces
-   Using databases

## Analyzing Data Topics

-   Descriptives and conditional means
-   Regression
-   Supervised learning: classification
-   Unsupervised learning: K-means and nearest neighbors clustering
-   Evaluating multiple models/ Cross Validation

## Presenting Data Analysis Topics

-   Descriptives: histograms, density plots, bar plots, dot plots
-   Scatterplots
-   Plots for Classification
-   Interactive Graphics

# Evaluation

Students will be evaluated based in two areas: weekly assignments and
the final project.

-   Problem sets: 65% Each week I will assign a problem set for students
    to complete. These problem sets will be assigned on Monday, and will
    be due the next Sunday night at 11:59:59 pm. No late assignments
    will be accepted. Each assignment will be graded on a 100 point
    scale. Your lowest grade will be dropped.

-   Final Project 35%: During the course of the semester you will work
    on a final assignment utilizing your skills as a data analyst. We
    will discuss this assignment and my expectations in detail during
    the course of the semester. There will be four progress reports due
    for the final project, each of which will be worth 12.5% of the
    final grade for the project. No late progress reports will be
    accepted. The final product will account for the remaining 50%. No
    late final products will be accepted.

# Texts

*Required Texts*

We will have two texts for the course. The first is Hadley Wickham’s
book, [R for Data Science](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/). Wickham is
generously making this book available for free. However, I strongly
encourage you to buy this book from [O’Reilly](http://amzn.to/2aHLAQ1).

[Amazon](https://www.amazon.com/R-Data-Science-Hadley-Wickham/dp/1491910399/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&qid=1469550189&sr=8-1&keywords=R+for+data+science&linkCode=sl1&tag=devtools-20&linkId=6fe0069f9605cf847ed96c191f4e84dd)

The other text is Nate Silver’s *Signal and the Noise*.

Silver,N. (2012). *The signal and the noise: Why so many predictions
fail-but some don’t*. New York: Penguin.

[Amazon](https://www.amazon.com/Signal-Noise-Many-Predictions-Fail-but/dp/0143125087)

[Your local
bookseller](http://www.indiebound.org/indie-bookstore-finder)

*Reserve*

I’ve placed three books by [Edward
Tufte](https://www.edwardtufte.com/tufte/books_vdqi) on reserve for you.
These are masterpieces in the area of visualizing quantitative
information. You should take a look at these for ideas and
inspiration–I’ve noted the sections that are most helpful in various
parts of the syllabus.

Tufte, E. R. (1990). Envisioning information. Cheshire, CT: Graphics
Press.

Tufte, E. R. (1997) Visual explanations. Cheshire, CT: Graphics press.

Tufte, E. R.(2001). The visual display of quantitative information (2nd
Edition). Cheshire, CT: Graphics press.

# Lecture Notes

My lecture notes include both code and notes for the week. They will be
available in your private github repository.

# Web Resources

When appropriate for each week, web resources are linked directly from
the syllabus. You will find a wealth of resources online, including
other versions of this class offered as Massive Online Open Courses. I
encourage you to take full advantage of the wealth of online materials
that are available. [Stack
Overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/r) is your friend,
but search carefully for your question. It is VERY likely that your
question has already been asked.

# Software

We will use only free, [open
source](https://opensource.org/osd-annotated) software in this course.

We will use [R](https://cran.r-project.org/), an open-source data
analytic platform for all analysis. R appears to be the most widely used
data analysis software in data science. We will utilize
[Rstudio](https://www.rstudio.com/home/) as our integrated development
environment (IDE) for R.

We will also use [git](https://git-scm.com/), a distributed version
control program, and [Github](https://github.com/), an online hosting
platform. [Github Desktop](https://desktop.github.com/) will serve as
our Graphical User Interface to git and GitHub. RStudio is fully
integrated with git and Github, making it an ideal IDE for these
purposes. Class assignments will be distributed through GitHub and will
be collected and graded through GitHub as well.

# Communication

You can book my office hours at: <https://outlook.office365.com/owa/calendar/WillDoyle@Vanderbilt365.onmicrosoft.com/bookings/> If my
office hours don’t work for you, please make an appointment over email.
Student communications, including emails are my priority. However, due
to the volume of email I receive, I may miss your message. To help with
this problem, please place the phrase \`\`HOD 3200’’ in your subject
line. I will search for these messages every time I access my email. You
can also use Brightspace’s email function, which will automatically do
this for you. If you have a general question that I can answer for the
whole class, send me a message on twitter at
[@wdoyle42](https://twitter.com/wdoyle42), tagged \#hoddatasci, or you
can send a direct message.

# The Tedious Stuff

This class will be impossible if you don’t show up. It’s reasonable to
contact me if for some reason you can’t make it for a given class
session.

We must use laptops in this class, despite the
[substantial](http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0956797614524581)
[body](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360131512002254?via%3Dihub)
of
[evidence](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0272775716303454)
that laptop use in classrooms hinders learning. To mitigate this
problem, the following standards will ALWAYS apply in class. You may
have RStudio open. You may also have a web browser open to a web page
that is relevant to course content. You MUST turn off all notifications
and messaging programs. If your web browser is open to Facebook,
Instagram or other purely social sites, or if you are responding to
messaging apps, I will ask you to leave class for the day. If you’re
joining us remotely the same rules apply.

Mobile phone use is never appropriate in class. I will ask you to leave
if you are using your mobile phone at any time. Exceptions are to be
arranged BEFORE class, not when I observe you using your mobile phone.

# Honor Code Statement

All assignments for this class, including weekly assignments and the
final project, are to be conducted under the obligations set out in
Vanderbilt’s Honor Code. Please click
[here](http://www.vanderbilt.edu/student_handbook/the-honor-system/) to
review the honor code.

There will be two quite different standards for completing the
assignments and the final project.

*Assignments* You may collaborate with anyone and you may utilize any
resource you wish to complete these assignments.

*Final Project* All of the work on the final assignment must be your
own. Anyone’s work that you reference should be cited, as usual. All
data that you do not personally collect must be cited, as with any other
resource.

If you have any questions at all about the honor code or how it will be
applied, ask me right away.

# Schedule

## Tuesday, January 26 Topic for the Week: Getting Data– Tools of the Trade

*Resources*

Wickham: [Introduction](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/introduction.html),
[Explore: Introduction](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/explore-intro.html),
[Workflow: basics](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/workflow-basics.html),
[Workflow: projects](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/workflow-projects.html)

Silver, Chapters 1-4

R Intro and Resources

[Download R](https://cran.r-project.org/)

[Download Rstudio](https://rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/) You
want the “Desktop” version, free license

[Rstudio Intro and Resources](https://www.rstudio.com/online-learning/)

[Download git](https://git-scm.com/downloads)

[Download GitHub Desktop](https://desktop.github.com)

[Github Intro and
Resources](https://guides.github.com/activities/hello-world/)

*Lesson Notes*

`01-intro.Rmd`.

## Thursday, January 28 Getting Data: Tools of the Trade

Subtopics: “verbs” of data wrangling, file types, working with git and
GitHub.

*Lab Practical* R Basics, “verbs” of data wrangling

## Tuesday, February 2 Analyzing Data: Conditional Means

*Resources*

Wickham: [Data transformation](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/transform.html)  
Silver, Chapters 5-9, 12-13

*Lecture Notes*

Condtional Means: `02-conditional_means.Rmd`.

*Assignments*

Assignment 1 Due Midnight, Sunday, January 31

## Thursday, February 4 Conditional Means, continued

*Standing Meetings*

*Lab Practical: Conditional Means*

## Tuesday, February 9 Presenting Data: Descriptives

Subtopics: bar plot, density plot, dot plots, histograms

*Resources*

Wickham: [Data
visualization](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/data-visualisation.html)

Wickham: [Exploratory Data
Analysis](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/exploratory-data-analysis.html)

[Cookbook for R:Bar and Line
Graphs](http://www.cookbook-r.com/Graphs/Bar_and_line_graphs_%28ggplot2%29/)

[Cookbook for R: Plotting
Distributions](http://www.cookbook-r.com/Graphs/Plotting_distributions_%28ggplot2%29/)

*Lecture Notes*

Plotting Distributions and Condtional Means: `03-plot_means.Rmd`.

*Assignments*

Assignment 2 Due Midnight Sunday, February 7

## Thursday, February 11 Descriptive Graphics, continued

*Standing Meeting* Progress Report 1 Due

*Lab Practical: Presenting results in graphical format: barplots,
density plots, dot plots, histograms*

## Tuesday, February 16 Getting Data: Flat Files, Basic Concepts of “Tidy Data”

*Resources*

Wickham: [Data import](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/data-import.html), [Tidy
data](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/tidy-data.html)

*Lecture Notes*

Flat Data `04-flat_data.Rmd`

*Assignments*

Assignment 3 Due Midnight Sunday, February 14

## Thursday, February 18 Flat Files and Tidy Data, continued

*Standing Meeting*

*Lab Practical: working with various data formats*

## Tuesday, February 23 Reading Day

Assignment: watch one of the following movies

-   Moneyball
-   Minority Report
-   Her
-   Margin Call

## Thursday, February 25 Analyzing Data: Linear Regression

*Resources*

Wickham: [Model: Introduction](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/model-intro.html),
[Model Basics](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/model-basics.html), [Model
Building](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/model-building.html)

*Lecture Notes*

Linear Regression `05-regression.Rmd`

## Tuesday, March 2 Analyzing Data: Linear Regression, continued

*Training and Testing Models*

*Assignments*

Assignment 4 Due Midnight Sunday, February 28

## Thursday, March 4 Linear Regression, continued

*Second Progress Report for Final Project Due*

## Tuesday, March 9 Presenting Data: Scatterplots

*Resources*

Wickham: [Data
Visualization](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/data-visualisation.html), [Graphics
for
Communication](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/graphics-for-communication.html)

Tufte, Visual Display chapters 4 and 5.

Tufte, Envisioning Information, chapter 2

*Lecture Notes*

Scatterplots `06-scatterplots.Rmd`

*Assignments*

Assignment 5 Due Midnight Sunday, March 7

## Thursday, March 11 Scatterplots, continued

*Standing Meetings*

*Lab Practical: Presenting Data via Scatterplots*

## Tuesday, March 16 Getting Data: Scraping Data from the Web, APIs

*Resources*

Rvest Vignette:
<https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/rvest/vignettes/selectorgadget.html>

[Reed College rvest
introduction](http://www.reed.edu/data-at-reed/resources/R/rvest.html)

[rvest
tutorial](https://stat4701.github.io/edav/2015/04/02/rvest_tutorial/)

*Lecture Notes*

Web Scraping and APIs, `07-webscraping.Rmd`

*Assignments*

Assignment 6 Due Midnight Sunday, March 14

## Thursday, March 18 Web Data, continued

*Standing Meetings*

*Lab Practical*

## Tuesday, March 23 Analyzing Data: Classification

*Resources*

James, G., Witten, D., Hastie, T., & Tibshirani, R. (2013). An
introduction to statistical learning (Vol. 6). New York: Springer.
[Chapter
4](http://faculty.marshall.usc.edu/gareth-james/ISL/ISLR%20Seventh%20Printing.pdf)
, [Chapter 4 Lab R
Code](http://faculty.marshall.usc.edu/gareth-james/ISL/Chapter%204%20Lab.txt)

Althoff, T., Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, C., & Jurafsky, D. (2014, May).
How to Ask for a Favor: A Case Study on the Success of Altruistic
Requests. In ICWSM. (Available
Here)\[<http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICWSM/ICWSM14/paper/download/8106/8101>\]

*Lecture Notes*

Classification, `08-classification.Rmd`

*Assignments*

Assignment 7 Due Midnight Sunday, March 21

*Lab Practical*

Classifying behavior via text analysis: random acts of pizza.

## Thursday, March 25 Classification, continued

## Tuesday, March 30 Presenting Data: Plots for Classification

*Resources*

*Lecture Notes*

Plots for Classification `09-plots_classification.Rmd`

*Assignments*

Assignment 8 Due Midnight Sunday, March 28

## Thursday, April 1 Plots for Classification, continued

*Standing Meetings*

*Third Progress Reports Due*

*Lab Practical*

Plots for understanding classification

## Tuesday, April 6 Analyzing Data: Cross Validation

*Resources*

Wickham [Many Models](http://r4ds.had.co.nz/many-models.html)

James, G., Witten, D., Hastie, T., & Tibshirani, R. (2013). An
introduction to statistical learning (Vol. 6). New York: Springer.
[Chapter
5](http://faculty.marshall.usc.edu/gareth-james/ISL/ISLR%20Seventh%20Printing.pdf)

*Lecture Notes*

`10-cross_validation.Rmd`

*Assignments*

Assignment 9 Due Midnight Sunday, April 4

## Thursday, April 8 Reading Day

Read Jill Lepore [“How the Simulmatics Corporation Invented the
Future”](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2020/08/03/how-the-simulmatics-corporation-invented-the-future)

## Tuesday, April 13 Cross Validation, continued

*Standing Meeting*

*Lab Practical*

Lab Practical: Cross Validation

## Thursday, April 15 Cross Validation, continued

*Lab Practical*

Lab Practical: Cross Validation for Classification

## Tuesday, April 20 Reporting Results: Using Knitr

*Resources*

James, G., Witten, D., Hastie, T., & Tibshirani, R. (2013). An
introduction to statistical learning (Vol. 6). New York: Springer.
[Chapter
10](http://www-bcf.usc.edu/~gareth/ISL/ISLR%20Sixth%20Printing.pdf) ,
[Chapter 10 Lab R
Code](http://www-bcf.usc.edu/~gareth/ISL/Chapter%2010%20Labs.txt)

*Lecture Notes*

*Assignments*

Assignment 10 Due Midnight Sunday, April 18

## Thursday, April 22 Reporting Results, Continued

*Standing Meetings*

*Fourth Progress Reports Due*

## Tuesday, April 27 Class Presentations

Group 1

## Thursday, April 29 Class Presentations

Group 2

## Final Projects Due Tuesday, May 4, midnight
